Introduction

Calculus is the branch of mathematics which deals with rates and change.
In algebra, one considers problems involving constant rates of change
such as "If a cat runs at 10 miles per hour and a dog runs at 15 miles
per hour, how long will it take for the dog to catch up with the cat if
the dog starts out 20 feet behind the cat?".  However, those techniques
only work for steady motion so, for instance, they would no longer 
apply to a more realistic version of the problem which takes into account
the fact that the animals don't instantly start running at top speed, but
require some time to get up to speed.

In order to cope with non-constant rates of change, we need to augment
our algebraic techniques with the concept of limit of a quantity.  Roughly
speaking, if a quantity y depends on a quantity x, then the limit of y is
the value which y approaches (but might not actually reach) as x behaves in
a certain way (such as becoming very small or very large or approaching
some specific value).  Once we have this concept of limit, we can then use 
it to define the processes of differentiation, in which we compute the 
instantaneous rate of change and integration, where we compute a quantity
from its instantaneous rate of change.

As it turns out, these same techniques of limits, differentiation, and
integration are also applicable to studying the geometry of curved lines
and surfaces.  We will use them to compute tangents, areas, and volumes 
of various shapes.

In this class, we will focus on two topics: learning and mastering the
techniques for computing limits, derivatives and integrals and applying
those techniques to real-world problems.  We will start out with simple
instances involving elementary algebra in order to become acquainted with
the new concepts, then gradually push forward to more advanced techniques
and applications involving exponential, logarithms, trigonometry, and the
like.

Prerequisites

Algebra:  This is the most important prerequisite since, as described above,
most of what we will be doing are algebraic manuipulations involving limits.
To get the most out the course, you should be proficientin manupulating powers,
polynomials and rational functions, factoring, expanding, collecting terms, 
and the like.

Geometry:  Aside from a general familiarity with Euclidean goemetry, you
should know how to plot curves and surfaces on a grid.

Trigonometry:  We will make use of trigonometric functions, exponentials, 
and logarithms, so familiarity with them will be assumed.  However, since 
this will not happen until relatively late in the course, there is plenty 
of time for someone who is not familiar with these topics to pick up
sufficient backround information; ask the instructor for recommendations 
on background reading.

Methodology

We will make use of a number of learning resources to teach this course.
It is not expected that every student will make use of every resource
listed here; rather, the idea is that, since different people learn
better in different ways, the student can pick and choose from those 
resources to best suit the student's learning style.  For instance,
someone who learns well by reading might look at different treatments of
the same topic in various books and articles whilst someone who learns
by doing might instead spend time working more problems.

Classroom sessions:  There will be 30 virtual classroom sessions grouped 
into three sets of 10; for a list of topics, please see below.  Each session 
will last 1 hour; the main focus will be on lecturing and problem solving,
but there will be ample time alotted to questions and student interaction.
Class size has deliberately been kept small to make for individualized 
attention; if you have a question or would like for more attention to a
particular topic, please feel free to speak up and ask.

Technically, these vrtual classroom sessions are made possible by a
combination of programs.

Textbook:  The textxook for this course is "the Calculus" by Davis and
Brenke.  This is a fairly typical textbook for the subject with a
practical bent towards engineering applictions.  The overall outline
of the course will follow the organization of this book, as indicated
in the schedule.  In order not to get lost in details, the lectures 
will not cover every single fact mentioned in the book but will focus
on the main concepts and techniques; once those have been mastered,
it is easy enough to go back and fill in the details.  

Supplementary reading:  When learning a subject, it sometimes can help 
to read more than account of it since different authors have different 
ways of explaining the same topic and offer different perspectives.  
Thus, one might find that something which was hard to understand in
one book becomes easy to understand in another source and that combining
several accounts deepens understanding.  (Alternately, reading too many
accounts of the same thing at first may be confusing; this varies from
person to person, so you need to pay attention and figure out what
works best for you.)

Therefore, we have made available suppleentary reading of various forms.
There is the calculus book by Sylvanuis Thompson which explains the same
material in a more "user-friendy" style.  There are encyclopedia entries, 
examples, and lecture notes posted by PlanetMath members.  If you would
like to make use of these or other reading, please feel free to ask the
instructor for guidance in coordinating supplementary reading with
course material.

Problems and solutions:

Discussion:

Schedule
